---
title: "Equivariant Polynomial Functional Networks"
permalink: /publication/2025-07-13-polynomialnfn
excerpt: 'Thieu N. Vo&#42;, Viet-Hoang Tran&#42;, Tho Tran Huu, An Nguyen The, Thanh Tran, Minh-Khoi Nguyen-Nhat, <strong>Duy-Tung Pham</strong>, Tan Minh Nguyen'
# <br><br> TL;DR: We design a family of monomial matrix-equivariant neural functional networks based on a parameter-sharing mechanism that achieves lower memory consumption and running time while preserving expressivity.'
date: 2025-11-06
venue: 'Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2025)'
paperurl: 'https://openreview.net/pdf?id=eTDgECpQ2I'
bibtexurl: '/files/5_polynomialnfn.bib'
---
Neural Functional Networks (NFNs) have gained increasing interest due to their wide range of applications, including extracting information from implicit representations of data, editing network weights, and evaluating policies. A key design principle of NFNs is their adherence to the permutation and scaling symmetries inherent in the connectionist structure of the input neural networks.  Recent NFNs have been proposed with permutation and scaling equivariance based on either graph-based message-passing mechanisms or parameter-sharing mechanisms. ompared to graph-based models, parameter-sharing-based NFNs built upon equivariant linear layers exhibit lower memory consumption and faster running time. However, their expressivity is limited due to the large size of the symmetric group of the input neural networks. The challenge of designing a permutation and scaling equivariant NFN that maintains low memory consumption and running time while preserving expressivity remains unresolved. In this paper, we propose a novel solution with the development of MAGEP-NFN (**M**onomial m**A**trix **G**roup **E**quivariant **P**olynomial **NFN**). Our approach follows the parameter-sharing mechanism but differs from previous works by constructing a nonlinear equivariant layer represented as a polynomial in the input weights. This polynomial formulation enables us to incorporate additional relationships between weights from different input hidden layers, enhancing the model's expressivity while keeping memory consumption and running time low, thereby addressing the aforementioned challenge. We provide empirical evidence demonstrating that MAGEP-NFN achieves competitive performance and efficiency compared to existing baselines.
